1)ns lookup -> Nslookup is a useful tool for troubleshooting DNS problems, such as host name resolution. When you start Nslookup, 
it shows the host name and IP address of the DNS server that is configured for the local system, 
and then display a command prompt for further queries. 
If you type a question mark ( ? ), Nslookup shows all available commands.
You can exit the program by typing exit .

2)route -> Route is used to view and modify the IP routing table. Route Print displays a list of current routes that the host knows. 
Sample output from the route command is shown in "Troubleshooting IP Routing" later in this chapter. 
Route Add adds routes to the table. 
Route Delete removes routes from the host's routing table.
Destination symbolic names -> N/W database file
gateway names -> Host database file

3)host(Linux command) -> This command resolves a host name into an Internet address or an Internet address into a host name.
Host is a simple utility for performing DNS lookups. It is normally used to convert names to IP addresses and vice versa. 
When no arguments or options are given, host prints a short summary of its command line arguments and options.

For Windows->
A machine with machine name "accounting" and ip "192.168.1.95"

IP -> Machine Name:

tracert 192.168.1.95
or

NBTSTAT  -a 192.168.1.95
Machine Name -> IP

nslookup accounting

or

ping accounting


4)arp -> information of source and destination adressess(ip and mac). 
Arp allows you to view and modify the ARP cache. If two hosts on the same subnet cannot ping each other successfully, 
try running the arp -a command on each computer to see whether the computers have the correct media access control (MAC) addresses listed for each other. 
You can use Ipconfig to determine a host's correct MAC address.

-d < IP address >

Delete

Removes the listed entry from the ARP cache

-s < MAC address >

Static

Adds a static entry to the ARP cache

-N < Interface IP address >

Interface

Lists all ARP entries for the interface specified

-a

Display

Displays all the current ARP entries for all interfaces

-g

Display

Displays all the current ARP entries for all interfaces

5)eth tool(linux command) -> ethtool is used to query and control network device driver and hardware settings, particularly for wired Ethernet devices

6)rarp ->The Reverse Address Resolution Protocol (RARP) is an obsolete computer networking protocol used by a client computer 
to request its Internet Protocol (IPv4) address from a computer network, 
when all it has available is its link layer or hardware address, such as a MAC address. 
The client broadcasts the request, and does not need prior knowledge of the network topology or the identities of servers capable of fulfilling its request.

7)ping ->Ping is the primary tool for troubleshooting IP-level connectivity. Type ping -? at a command prompt to see a complete list of available command-line options. 
Ping allows you to specify the size of packets to use (the default is 32 bytes), 
how many to send, whether to record the route used, what Time To Live (TTL) value to use, and whether to set the "don't fragment" flag.

When a ping command is issued, the utility sends an ICMP Echo Request to a destination IP address. Try pinging the IP address of the target host to see if it responds. If that succeeds, try pinging the target host using a host name. 
Ping first attempts to resolve the name to an address through a DNS server, then a WINS server (if one is configured), then attempts a local broadcast. 
When using DNS for name resolution, if the name entered is not a fully qualified domain name, the DNS name resolver appends the computer's domain name or names to generate a fully qualified domain name.

If pinging by address succeeds but pinging by name fails, the problem usually lies in name resolution, not network connectivity. 
Note that name resolution might fail if you do not use a fully qualified domain name for a remote name. 
These requests fail because the DNS name resolver is appending the local domain suffixes to a name that resides elsewhere in the domain hierarchy.

8)trace-route -> Traces route to destination. Giving details of every router.

9)Netsat -> Netstat displays protocol statistics and current TCP/IP connections. 
From a command prompt, type Netstat -a to display all connections and listening ports. 
Type netstat -r to display the contents of the IP routing table and any persistent routes. 
The -n switch tells Netstat not to convert addresses and port numbers to names, which speeds up execution. 
The netstat -s option shows all protocol statistics. 
The netstat -p < protocol > option can be used to show statistics for a specific protocol or together with the -s option to show connections only for the protocol specified. 
The -e switch displays interface statistics.

10)DIG(DOMAIN INFORMATION GROPER) -> Using dig command you can query DNS name servers for your DNS lookup related tasks.
linux-> A command
windows-> A tool

11)ifplugstatus -> ifplugstatus is an utility which may be used to detect the link status of a local Linux ethernet device, 
much in the same way mii-diag, mii-tool and ethtool work. 
In fact it supports all three different APIs these three tools use. 
In addition it supports link checking with the IFF_RUNNING interface flag, 
which most modern drivers (not only ethernet) support, 
and association status checking with the wireless extension API for WLAN devices.

12)yshap(tool for traffic analysis)
denial of service -> if a and b are communicating, c comes in b/w and takes the data through ip address so that b does not recieve anything
poisoning/spoofing attack -> b recieves some modified information as c modifies it
these attacks are possible through arp packs

13)ipconfig ->IPConfig is a command-line tool that displays the current configuration of the installed IP stack on a networked computer.

When used with the /all switch, it displays a detailed configuration report for all interfaces, 
including any configured WAN miniports (typically used for remote access or VPN connections). 
Output can be redirected to a file and pasted into other documents. A sample 
http is an application layer protocol

All servers are hosts, but not all hosts are servers. Any device that has established a connection to a network qualifies as a host,
whereas only hosts that accept connections from other devices (clients) qualify as servers.

A gateway is a node (router) in a computer network, a key stopping point for data on its way to or from other networks. 
Thanks to gateways, we are able to communicate and send data back and forth. 
The Internet wouldn't be any use to us without gateways (as well as a lot of other hardware and software).

Hostname displays the name of the host on which the command is issued. The command has no other switches or parameters. 
The host name displayed matches the name configured on the Network table in Control Panel-System .

When we try to connect to a website with then the destination ip addressess will be different for different connection requests